now tensions between Israel and Iran
have turned the spotlight on teran's
nuclear capabilities the West accuses
Iran of using its civil nuclear program
as a cover for developing weapons which
it
denies Isfahan is at the heart of Iran's
nuclear program this conversion plant is
located outside the
city powered by three Chinese supplied
research reactors it produces fuel for
Iran's civilian nuclear
program these images were shot in March
2005 one of a rare occasions the world
got to see
inside deep underground in The Wider
province of Isfahan is vetan uranium
enrichment facility Western Nations say
Iran is operating a secret weapons
program here Tano denies it is
developing a nuclear
bomb in 15 after long negotiations
Western Nations struck a deal with Iran
to stop it becoming a nuclear power Tran
got relief from sanctions in return for
accepting limits on its nuclear
activities with courage political will
mutual respect and Leadership we
delivered on what the world was hoping
for the following year a new president
moved into the White House in 2018 he
made good on one of his election
promises I am announcing today that the
United States will withdraw from the
Iran nuclear
deal without us participation the
agreement quickly unraveled Iranian
Engineers got back to work and progress
has been Swift the UN nuclear Watchdog
says Iran is now producing uranium close
to weapons grade
levels these facilities are attempting
targets for opponents of the Iranian
regime in 2010 a computer virus crippled
operations at nans no one has ever
accepted responsibility but many believe
a virus was developed by the US and
Israel nans was again the Target in 2021
for power went out here setting
enrichment back by months Iran called it
an act of nuclear sabotage and blamed
Israel
back in the present day footage claimed
to have been shot at the Isfahan
facility Tran says the site here is safe
and and damaged following Israel's
strike all right let's get more from
Rafael grai he's director general of the
international atomic energy agency the
iaea welcome to DW Mr grai how close
would you say is uh Iran to producing an
operational nuclear bomb
well uh here I think we have to clarify
something uh there is a normal
assumption when when we talk about uh
break through times and and how close or
how far the country can be uh to
assimilate uh that metric with the
amount of time required to have the ne
the necessary amount of enriched
uranium which is at the moment
uh estimated assessed as As a matter of
weeks rather than months uh but that
does not mean that Iran has or would
have a nuclear weapon in that space of
time and I think that is a important
clarification to be to be made um a
functional like you say a functional
nuclear warhead requires many other
things independently from the production
of the f iile material in this case the
uranium including perhaps being being
tested so while we say that the
situation is uh is a situation that
warrants our alert because of the
enrichment at almost military levels um
we cannot be deriving from that the
direct conclusion that Iran has now a
nuclear weapon but why would Iran be
enrich ing uranium to near Military
levels if it doesn't want to produce a
nuclear
weapon well that is a fair question and
it's a question that many are asking at
the same time Mo motivations or um
objectives or goals are a matter of of
of speculation and Iran of course the
public line is that they want this
material for medical or rather civilian
purposes is not very clear why these
amounts and at this speed need and at
that level would be required from that
but since that is not technically
impossible this cannot be uh argued back
uh but what is clear and what I have
been telling my Iranian counterparts
time and again is that of course this
activity raises eyebrows and um
compounded with the fact that we are not
getting the necessary degree of access
and visibility that I believe should be
necessary
so when you put all of that together
then of course you end up with lots of
question marks so if you're not getting
the level of uh access that you would
ideally like to have it could be the
case that as we are talking right now
Iran is effectively developing a nuclear
weapon and you would not know about
it well I I wouldn't be so sure about
that what may be happening is that uh
Iran could be you know producing
uh parts for
centrifuges uh and other ancillary
equipment of this of this type which
would of course have a repercussion in
their in their General capabilities but
I cannot uh be speculating about that we
do not have any information of that type
that there is because this is what
you're pointing at that there is an
active nuclear weapon program as we
speak that would be incorrect that would
that would be misleading that being said
um there are doubts Iran has not
clarified a number of findings the
agency made in Iran about activities for
example taking place in in in places on
sites that were not supposed to be
nuclear sites so we have a number of
questions why did we find traces of
enrich uranium in places that are now a
farm or a parking lot what was there
where is it now so these questions and
at the same time at the same time we
have lost and your introduction was very
graphic in that regard we lost after
this famous 2015 agreement the
jcpoa was abandoned uh we have lost a
number of um accesses and visibility and
monitoring that for us is is very
important and this has been at the
center of this dialogue that I have been
and I am still trying to conduct with
Iran right I'm trying to understand the
risk uh that all of this poses to the
world essentially and this is where the
Israel Hamas War comes in because this
as you've seen has increased tensions
between Israel and Iran do you think
that the longer this war goes on the
greater the risk that Israel could
potentially attack Iran's nuclear
facilities well I I I I hope hope not I
have said a few days ago in the context
of another conflict we are dealing with
which is the one in Ukraine and
referring at the security Council to the
situation in
saporia that uh you know attacking
nuclear facilities is an absolute no go
um it it is contrary to international
law by the way but um it is something
that is completely unacceptable and on
top of that what we see is a tendency a
very warison tendency really um of many
not only the Iranians but others as well
to brandish the Menace of attacking
nuclear facilities or even dropping
nuclear weapons as it happened with with
Gaza as you remember in the beginning of
the conflict so I believe that this this
normalization of talk about nuclear
weapons dropping nuclear weapons getting
nuclear weapons is absolutely deplorable
we have something that is called the
nuclear nonproliferation regime which
may not be perfect granted but it has um
allowed uh us for the past 70 years
almost to um avoid nuclear war and to
avoid situations that will be completely
out of control and we are getting closer
to a situation where this could happen
if we start um sapping the the
nonproliferation regime in this
irresponsible way now Mr grai at the at
the weekend it was reported that behind
the scenes Iran is in contact with the
United States to resume nuclear
negotiations can you confirm
this well I think there are some
contacts and and it's perhaps it's a
question for the United States and not
for me or for Iran uh what we uh are
always trying to promote is dialogue we
hope this dialogue takes place uh and
what we are interested what I am
interested in is the dialogue between us
the Ia and Iran because there are many
things that need to be to be clarified
and it is for this that we are going to
be traveling to tan soon and what will
you be what is the message you'll be
bringing uh to Teran with you because so
far in this conversation it appears that
the Iranians aren't being absolutely as
honest as you would like them to be
which leads me to wonder what is the
message you bring to
them well you use the world honest which
is perhaps too much for me to get into
this area what I would say is that Iran
should cooperate more and this is this
is clear so more than a message I will
be there to try to put these things back
on track if they want to be believed and
I don't have a problem with that because
we don't have an an anti anti-iranian
agenda but what we say is we we we need
to verify we need to be able to have
unfettered access we need to have the
possibility to see what we need to see
if they don't have anything to hide as
they say so vly why they are not
cooperating with us in the way they
should so this more than a message will
be I hope I sincerely hope will be a
serious conversation to put things back
on track because we are not on track as
we should at this moment we'll leave it
there for the time being but thank you
so much for joining us today Rafael
crosy director general of the
international atomic energy agency thank
you so much thank you very much